>> Exciting new research and
cutting-edge technologies show
just how powerful
sound, vibration,
and frequency are in
facilitating healing
and expansion of consciousness.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Sound has been
used for millennia
as a powerful tool
for physical healing
and spiritual awakening.
Today, new research
into the science
of sound as well as
emerging technologies
to deliver personalized
sound healing
has revolutionized
the ancient practice.
Dr. Jeffrey Thompson is
a renowned sound healer
who has over the last
40 years pioneered
a range of remarkable
discoveries in the field.
He explains how our connection
to sound begins before birth.
>> My total experience in
the womb and for all of us--
baptized by sound and vibration.
My ears are hearing it.
And the largest sense
organ of my body, my skin,
is feeling it.
That's my whole experience
for nine months.
I think that's why sound is the
most powerful clinical tool.
Sound is bigger and more
powerful than all of them.
>> The mechanism by which sound
brings about physical healing
has been studied for decades
and is continually being refined
by new scientific findings.
>> When a cell goes
into a healing response,
it increases its metabolism and
its intake of food expelling
of waste and
rebuilding of tissue.
So it's raising its energy up.
Sound waves can raise it to
its high as possible potential.
That is way higher than
the cell can do on its own.
So we've just created
a super healing state
with sound waves, when
they're tuned correctly.
>> This method stimulates
the brain into entering
into a specific state by
utilizing the inherent nature
of brain waves to synchronize
with an external stimulus such
as sound.
>> The phenomenon of brain wave
entrainment is part of a deeper
function in the body.
If the master control can time
my body rhythms to the world,
to rhythms that are
already happening,
then I can save energy.
That's why my brain waves
will follow an external cue.
Once we understand
this principle,
we can start to
use that principle
to gain control of
your body for healing.
>> An integral element of
brain entrainment is the use
of binaural beats, which are
two sounds that are slightly out
of tune.
The brain, looking to make
sense of the dissonance,
entrains to the
pulse in between,
linking brain
hemispheres together.
In order for this
to work, headphones
must be used so
that each ear hears
a slightly different sound.
>> With binaural beats,
hemispheres do this and come
apart--
the a-ha bang.
This is a highly desirable
state that nobody
knows how to get to.
But as soon as you use binaural
beats with headphones, bang,
it's there.
And it's floating there
for long periods of time.
>> Dr. Thompson has built upon
these principles of acoustic
physics and added a new
medical monitoring technology
to develop a sophisticated sound
healing protocol which seeks
to awaken what he calls the
internal healing program.
He begins a
sound-healing session
by connecting the patient
to a heart-rate variability
monitor, which provides
a complete look
at the state of the
patient's nervous system
and overall health.
>> So now we can see the
sympathetic parasympathetic
live.
And we can do an
analysis to find out
how it's functioning normally.
And if it's not
functioning normally,
my innovation is
being able to return
it to balance with precisely
tuned sound frequency.
And you calculate
octaves of that
and identify brain
frequencies and then
train your brain waves
to those frequencies
so it all synchronizes up.
I can see your brain
waves go to this place.
I can see that
there's a coherence
of right-left hemispheres.
I can see the autonomic
nervous system
going into this
special zero stress
zone, a prerequisite for waking
up, a prerequisite for healing.
>> In addition to the use of
the nervous system monitoring
and frequency-tuning
technologies, Dr.
Thompson has developed a
unique delivery system using
the latest in vibration science.
I had to make the sound table
split down the middle longways
with speakers on
the right and left.
I had to have the right-left
stereo separation, the same way
the headphones are.
And the split down the middle
to separate the right and left
so they're not
influencing each other
is now headphones for the body
so that I could get the neurons
for vibration sense processing,
neurons in the brain stem,
to do the same thing
and have that in sync
with these special LED
glasses I put together
with little LEDs that are
driven by the sound wave.
So now this eye is
seeing one frequency.
This is seeing another.
And I'm forcing the
occipital cortex
to do this and the
auditory cortex
kinesthetic cortex to do this.
And the more synchronized
up I can make systems,
the more efficient the
whole system becomes.
>> There are numerous accounts
of healing resulting from
the use of sound technologies,
from listening to binaural
beats soundtracks to the
more involved multi-sensory
therapies such as
Dr. Thompson's.
And today, emerging new research
on stimulating specific brain
waves is showing great
promise in addressing
neurological disorders and
bringing about the expansion
of consciousness.
For more on this, be sure to
watch part 2 of this Gaia News
special investigative report.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.